---
layout: post
title: ncdns v0.0.8 Released
author: Jeremy Rand
tags: [Releases, ncdns Releases]
---

We've released ncdns v0.0.8.  *But the previous release was v0.0.6, what happened to v0.0.7*, you ask?  Well, since we're a human rights project, we didn't want to stain our release with a reference to the criminal organization that overthrew the democratically elected Iranian government, so v0.0.7 got skipped.  [1]  List of changes in v0.0.8:

* TLS interoperability:
    - Firefox TLS certificate positive overrides via `cert_override.txt` are now built into ncdns; manually running `ncdumpzone` is no longer needed.  Some config file settings must be set manually for this to work.
* DNS interoperability:
    - Fix support for DNAME records (AKA the Namecoin `translate` field) in madns / ncdns.
* Tor interoperability:
    - Fix support for DNAME records (AKA the Namecoin `translate` field) in `dns-prop279`.
* Tools:
    - `generate_nmc_cert`: Rebase against Go v1.8.3 standard library.
    - `generate_nmc_cert`: Use P256 curve by default.
    - `ncdumpzone`: Use `easyconfig` instead of `kingpin`; this allows config files to be used with `ncdumpzone`.
* Windows:
    - Upgrade dnssec-keygen to v9.13.2.
    - Upgrade DNSSEC-Trigger to v0.17.
    - Fix default `$APPDATA` path for Namecoin Core.  This should fix a bug where Namecoin Core would crash with a permission error on 2nd run if Namecoin Core was installed for the first time via ncdns.
    - Disable cookie authentication when ConsensusJ-Namecoin is selected.  This should fix a bug where ncdns couldn't connect to ConsensusJ-Namecoin.
    - Detect if Visual C++ 2010 Redistributable Package is missing.  This should fix a bug where ConsensusJ-Namecoin would crash on startup.
* NetBSD:
    - NetBSD/ARM binaries are now available again.
* Build system:
    - Upgrade Go to v1.10.3.
* Miscellaneous:
    - Many code quality improvements.

As usual, you can download it at the [Beta Downloads page]({{site.baseurl}}download/betas/#ncdns).

This work was funded by NLnet Foundation's Internet Hardening Fund.

[1] Actually, I screwed up the release scripts and didn't notice until after v0.0.7 was already tagged, so v0.0.7 was unreleaseable.  But I like the above reason better.
