---
layout: post
title: ncdns v0.0.9.2 Released
author: Jeremy Rand
tags: [Releases, ncdns Releases]
---

We've released ncdns v0.0.9.2.  List of changes in v0.0.9.2:

* All platforms:
    - New build system based on The Tor Project's rbm.  This paves the way for reproducible builds.
    - Add an optional mode to `generate_nmc_cert` that creates a name-constrained CA cert instead of an end-entity cert.  This mode is required for Tor Browser TLS support.
    - Add "URL list" output format to `ncdumpzone`.  This paves the way for a decentralized search engine for Namecoin websites.
    - Make Namecoin RPC timeout configurable.  This improves compatibility with Tor Browser.
    - Move `x509` to its own repo.  This improves compatibility with Tor Browser.
* Windows:
    - Automatically re-run `tlsrestrictnss` when NSS is updated; this improves TLS support for Firefox.
    - Upgrade dnssec-keygen to v9.13.3.
* New projects:
    - DNSSEC-HSTS v0.0.1: A WebExtension that prevents sslstrip attacks for Namecoin websites that support TLS.  See my 35C3 slides for more details.
    - ncp11 v0.0.1: Enables Namecoin TLS in browsers that support PKCS#11, such as Tor Browser.  See my 35C3 slides for more details.
    - ncprop279 v0.0.1: Enables Namecoin resolution in Tor; somewhat smaller and more efficient than dns-prop279.
* Code quality improvements.

As usual, you can download it at the [Beta Downloads page]({{site.baseurl}}download/betas/#ncdns).

This work was funded by NLnet Foundation's Internet Hardening Fund and Cyphrs.
